It might seem crazy what I'm about to say.
NOTE CONF
So sure she's here.
You can take a break.
NOTE CONF
From a hot air balloon.
I could go to space.
NOTE CONF
With the air.
Like I don't care, baby.
NOTE CONF
By the way.
Huh?
NOTE CONF
Because I'm happy.
Clap along if you feel like a room without a
NOTE CONF
roof.
Because I'm happy.
NOTE CONF
Clap along if you feel like happiness is the truth.
Because I'm happy.
NOTE CONF
Clap along if you know what happiness is to you.
Because I'm happy.
NOTE CONF
Clap along if you feel like that's what you want
to do.
NOTE CONF
Here come bad back.
Who's talking?
NOTE CONF
Listen, man.
Yeah, well, give me all you got.
NOTE CONF
No holding back.
Yeah, well, I should probably warn you.
NOTE CONF
I'll be just fine.
Yeah, no offence to you.
NOTE CONF
Don't waste your time.
Here's why.
NOTE CONF
Because I'm happy.
Clap along if you feel like a room without a
NOTE CONF
roof.
Because I'm happy.
NOTE CONF
Clap along if you feel like happiness is the truth.
Because I'm happy.
NOTE CONF
Clap along if you know what happiness is to you.
Because I'm happy.
NOTE CONF
Clap along if you feel like that's what you want
to do.
NOTE CONF
Bring me down.
It's working.
NOTE CONF
Oh, there it goes.
Okay, I forgot my microphone.
NOTE CONF
Um, yeah.
Uh, I just realised this is ten years old.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so much for my up to date, uh, music.
Okay, so today, uh, expression trees as an algebraic data
NOTE CONF
type.
You had the first half of this on Tuesday.
NOTE CONF
Um, and I showed you, um, this was about representing
syntax of languages, um, using Haskell algebraic data types.
NOTE CONF
And I showed you, uh, first example was arithmetic expressions
with uh, with um, uh, integers, addition and multiplication.
NOTE CONF
Um, so we went through that how to represent them
with three cases.
NOTE CONF
Um, how to evaluate them.
Uh, with a function with uh, you know, usual, usual
NOTE CONF
pattern matching function definition with three cases.
Um, there were variations for um infix expression, infix constructors
NOTE CONF
and symbolic constructors.
Anyway, so that was my first example.
NOTE CONF
And then I moved on to propositions which is logical
propositions with uh propositional variables which are strings, uh false
NOTE CONF
true negation, uh disjunction and conjunction.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So similar to the arithmetic expressions, except more complicated because
there are six cases, um, uh, and there were variables
NOTE CONF
in there, not just constants.
True and false.
NOTE CONF
And so we had examples like, like this is the
um, uh, the prop, uh, you know, variable a conjunction
NOTE CONF
negation of the variable a okay.
Written.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Well.
NOTE CONF
Written like that.
Um, in normal logical notation.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So you remember that, right?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, now, uh, I stopped at that point, and now
NOTE CONF
I want to talk about evaluation.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
How do we evaluate a proposition like that?
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
Well, here's six lines of, uh, well, six lines plus,
uh, type signature, um, for an evaluation function.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And the evaluation function takes a proposition and turns it
NOTE CONF
into a boolean.
But we can't do that for a proposition with variables
NOTE CONF
in it without having more information.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So if I, if I ask you like, what is
that?
NOTE CONF
What is the value of this expression.
Well, for this case you can actually say it's false.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Because uh, whether A is true or whether A is
NOTE CONF
false, you'll still get false out of this.
But, um, you know, uh, taking a, uh, taking something
NOTE CONF
more complicated.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
Let's know, taking something more complicated.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So whether or not this is true or false depends
on the value of a.
NOTE CONF
Okay, uh, this will always be false.
But then whether A is true or false determines the
NOTE CONF
value of that.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So in order to in order to evaluate a proposition,
I need to know what the values of the variables
NOTE CONF
are.
And so this evaluation function, uh requires an extra parameter.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It's the valuation.
NOTE CONF
What's the valuation?
It's a function taking variable names to their values.
NOTE CONF
Okay I define it to be that.
All right.
NOTE CONF
And then the the the cases here there's one case
for every constructor okay.
NOTE CONF
Just reminding you six constructors variables false true negation conjunction
sorry disjunction conjunction.
NOTE CONF
So one for each case I'll start with the second
case okay.
NOTE CONF
And remember that on the left hand side where these
are the constructors for propositions.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is syntax.
NOTE CONF
This is building up expressions like you know that I
might have written like this uh, in logic, okay.
NOTE CONF
They're expressed using these constructors.
So slightly different notation.
NOTE CONF
But anyway, taking syntax and coming up with the value
of that given a uh, an interpretation of the variables.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And so what you get on the right hand side
NOTE CONF
is boolean expressions okay.
Things like false value of of f is false value
NOTE CONF
of t is true value of negation of p.
You evaluate p and you negate it.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And uh evaluating uh p or q and p and
NOTE CONF
q you evaluate P, you evaluate Q, and then you
do the appropriate, um, thing in Haskell, uh, you know,
NOTE CONF
uh, disjunction or conjunction with those two values.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um, I made the remark when I was talking
about evaluating arithmetic expressions that this definition is so is
NOTE CONF
so, uh, kind of simple.
And it's hard to see that it's actually doing anything.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Uh, you know, uh, but it is doing something.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
The stuff on the left hand side is proposition.
NOTE CONF
The stuff on the right hand side is, is Boolean
value.
NOTE CONF
And it's basically mapping the syntactic, uh, um, syntactic constructs
over here.
NOTE CONF
Uh, the, uh, to, to like they're, they're meaning in,
in whoops.
NOTE CONF
They're meaning in um in the booleans.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
The truth values.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, this first case here, okay.
That that's the one where we're using the um, the
NOTE CONF
valuation, the only one we're using, the valuation, the other
cases, we're just passing the valuation on to be able
NOTE CONF
to evaluate the subexpressions.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
But in this first case, um, if we've got a
variable called x, then to get the value we simply
NOTE CONF
look it up in the valuation.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Valuation is the um is the first parameter here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we just look it up.
Have you got that.
NOTE CONF
Sort of questions.
Here's an example.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Oh, no, I'll do I'll do it on the on
NOTE CONF
the paper.
Okay, so, um, this is a lot like truth tables.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, um.
NOTE CONF
The value of a can be, uh, false or.
I mean, this is a truth table for this, for
NOTE CONF
this expression, the expression being, um, a and not a.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I don't know how much Julian went through on
this or whether he sort of, um, assumed that you
NOTE CONF
knew how to do it.
Anyway, it's in the book.
NOTE CONF
Okay, to evaluate this expression a and not a.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
You, uh, I mean, for all the possible values of
a, um, uh, you can write the possible values of
NOTE CONF
a in this column, and then the kind of subexpressions.
You break it down into subexpressions and quickly, I'll just
NOTE CONF
write down the value of the negation of a, and
then the value of the conjunction of those two things
NOTE CONF
is written down here as the result.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is familiar right.
Truth tables.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
No I think I think it should be um, okay.
NOTE CONF
And um, so given.
An evaluation of variables is picking out a row here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
In this case it's one variable.
NOTE CONF
So it's either true or false.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And the the value produced using eval prop is giving
you, you know, the corresponding value in the um in
NOTE CONF
the final column.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So if if the valuation says that a is true,
then the value of the expression is going to be
NOTE CONF
false.
And the kind of writing it down in columns like
NOTE CONF
this is kind of like, uh, the I mean, the
evaluation of this proceeds by breaking the, um, the expression
NOTE CONF
down into subexpressions and, and recursively.
Um, so if it was a bigger expression, then there
NOTE CONF
would be more, more columns here.
Anyway, uh, this is just to show you kind of
NOTE CONF
informally what's happening here.
Um, so in my example, I'd write it not like.
NOTE CONF
You know, not using normal logical notation, but using this
notation here that I've just defined.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we've got a variable, a uh, conjunction negation of
NOTE CONF
that variable, eh?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, I said evaluation is a is a function from,
um, from variable names to, um, boolean values.
NOTE CONF
So here is an example of one okay.
It has four variables in it.
NOTE CONF
Just in order to make sure I have enough okay.
And so I'm saying a is true B is false
NOTE CONF
C is false and D is true.
And then applying you know, let me just uh well
NOTE CONF
I didn't I didn't go through it.
But there's a function I also had on my slides
NOTE CONF
for, for turning a proposition into a string, which would
give that result.
NOTE CONF
But evaluating the proposition with that evaluation would produce the
result false.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And it's exactly like I said, the second row of
NOTE CONF
this truth table is what's happening there.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And the way it works is step by step explained
right up there.
NOTE CONF
Let me just.
It's it's step by step here.
NOTE CONF
And, um, for example.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, evaluation with that, with that, with that evaluation of
that whole expression.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It breaks it down into pieces.
NOTE CONF
And then, for example, one of the things that it's
doing is um, is, uh, looking at, uh, wait a
NOTE CONF
minute, this is what I wanted to say.
So, uh, evaluating that involves, for example, evaluating, uh, the
NOTE CONF
variable a, which according to the first case, um, is
a matter of, uh, applying the evaluation to a that's
NOTE CONF
this first case here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And, uh, on my previous slide, the value of a
the valuation applied to A gives true.
NOTE CONF
So the result of that is is true.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And then the other bits get evaluated.
In the end you end up with false.
NOTE CONF
All right.
I hope that's.
NOTE CONF
Clear enough.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Looking at another example is more complicated.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This one, this one, uh.
This one was kind of boring because it, uh.
NOTE CONF
The result was false.
No matter what the variable a what, no matter what
NOTE CONF
the value of A was.
Okay, let's take a little bit more complicated one.
NOTE CONF
So um, let's take one with two variables.
So um.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to write it in, in normal, uh, logical
notation here to make it easier to read.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
This is this is this P1 here.
So, um, A and B or not a and not
NOTE CONF
be okay.
Here it is written using normal logical notation.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
If I want to, um, evaluate that, uh, it's handy
NOTE CONF
to, um, break it down into subexpressions.
Let me do that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
That would be a truth table.
NOTE CONF
And, uh, possible values here are, uh.
Are those four.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Two variables for four possible valuations.
NOTE CONF
And then I can I can work out the values
for these.
NOTE CONF
Um, uh, so, um, you know, t t I'll do
it quickly.
NOTE CONF
Uh.
Uh, k a and b, that's false.
NOTE CONF
False.
True.
NOTE CONF
This is, um.
True.
NOTE CONF
False.
And this is true.
NOTE CONF
False.
True.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
You could.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, um, so here's a case where the value depends
NOTE CONF
on the values of the variables.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And so if I take for example, um, the valuation
where uh a is true and b is true.
NOTE CONF
So that was the last line here.
The result should be true.
NOTE CONF
And that's that's what I get.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So now you know, how do you evaluate a proposition
uh, when it's represented in Haskell like this.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, uh, do you remember what it's, uh, I mean,
NOTE CONF
so this is is this a tautology?
No, it's not a tautology, because because the, um, there's
NOTE CONF
there's both truth and, uh, true and false in this
column.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But it's satisfiable.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
There's at least one t here.
NOTE CONF
My previous example.
This was not a tautology.
NOTE CONF
Obviously.
It's also not satisfiable okay.
NOTE CONF
It's called a contradiction.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So given a formula, uh, propositional formula.
Like like like that one or this one, um, you
NOTE CONF
might be interested in, in working out.
Is it a is it a tautology.
NOTE CONF
Is it satisfiable?
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
And, um, you know, now that I've given you code
for evaluating, uh, propositions, given certain valuations, you could imagine,
NOTE CONF
like computing the right hand column in this table and
then looking at it and deciding whether or not that's
NOTE CONF
a tautology or whether it's satisfiable.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to quickly, uh, go through some code
for doing that.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Being careful not to run out of time.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, if I want to do that.
NOTE CONF
So suppose I want to work out whether whether or
not a given proposition is satisfiable.
NOTE CONF
Meaning I need to compute this column and then look
to see if there's a the value true in it
NOTE CONF
somewhere.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's what we're going to do now.
So the first step is to um we need to
NOTE CONF
work out whether it's what the value is for each
of the values of the variables.
NOTE CONF
So the first thing we need to do is to
know what all the variables are in the proposition.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
We don't know uh, ahead of time.
NOTE CONF
Um, so um, this particular example that I just had
there had two variables.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
My first example had one variable.
NOTE CONF
The second example had two variables.
And so this is a little program that goes through
NOTE CONF
all of these six cases and computes the variables in
that proposition.
NOTE CONF
Whatever, whatever it was.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um, very quickly, uh, uh, okay.
If you've got a variable, then the variables in that
NOTE CONF
proposition are obviously that one variable.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So the list.
Sorry, sorry, I should have started by telling you, um,
NOTE CONF
I've got a a type definition.
Names is a list of name.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this function names takes a proposition and gives you
NOTE CONF
a list of names okay.
And so if the variable if there's a variable x
NOTE CONF
then the list of names there is the list containing
just x.
NOTE CONF
Right.
That's.
NOTE CONF
Uh oops.
That's the first case okay.
NOTE CONF
False and true have no variables in them.
So we've got the empty list there.
NOTE CONF
Um, if we've got a negated proposition, it's the same
list of names as you have in the proposition without
NOTE CONF
the negation And then finally the two cases, um, disjunction
and conjunction.
NOTE CONF
You compute the names and p.
And the names and q.
NOTE CONF
And you, um, append them.
So you take these two lists, append them, and then
NOTE CONF
um, this is a function in Haskell nub which um,
it's built in, it's well, it's in the library data
NOTE CONF
dot list.
It um, it takes a list and removes duplicates, okay.
NOTE CONF
Because, uh, we, we only want one, one copy of
each of the names of the variables.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, um, so that's what that does.
NOTE CONF
It just removes the duplicates.
And so for example uh names of P1, you get
NOTE CONF
a and B okay.
P1 was this was this thing.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And it's why is it a B?
NOTE CONF
It's because the first, you know, a list of variables.
There is a list of variables.
NOTE CONF
Here is B the list of variables for this whole
subexpression is a and b.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Oops.
NOTE CONF
Now the list of variables for the second subexpression is
also a and b.
NOTE CONF
Okay, the list of variables for the whole expressions you've
got a and b, sorry a and b, and you've
NOTE CONF
got a and b.
You take the the append of those two, you get
NOTE CONF
a, b, ab and then nub.
Nub uh removes duplicates and you just end up with
NOTE CONF
A and B.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Which is why the answer is is like that okay.
So.
NOTE CONF
That's how I get the list of variables in a
in a in a proposition.
NOTE CONF
Now.
Um, once I've got the list of variables in a
NOTE CONF
proposition, I want to have the list of possible valuations
over, um, over that list of variables.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So going back to my example here with the truth
NOTE CONF
table given this expression here.
I've worked out how many columns I need, you know,
NOTE CONF
and the names of the variables A and B.
And what I want to now compute is all of
NOTE CONF
the possible valuations.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, if there are two variables there's going to be
two.
NOTE CONF
There's going to be four evaluations.
How many variables?
NOTE CONF
How many valuations are there if there are n variables.
Two to the n.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Thanks.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So um if n equals two that's four.
NOTE CONF
Uh, what if there's zero variables.
There's one.
NOTE CONF
Yeah okay.
There's one variable.
NOTE CONF
There's one valuation for zero variables.
What is it.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, you know, uh, it's a function.
NOTE CONF
It's the function.
It has type name arrow bool.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But what that what is that.
NOTE CONF
What is that one function in the case where there's
no variables.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It's a function which takes a variable name and says
NOTE CONF
that it's undefined because there aren't any variables.
And so and so any variable you give it, it's
NOTE CONF
going to say no, I don't know the variable value
of that variable.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
This is what this is.
NOTE CONF
This is what I've got here.
The empty valuation.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, I apply it I apply it to a, to
NOTE CONF
a, um.
Actually, I could have written that differently.
NOTE CONF
Anyway, um, I apply it to a variable name, and
it just tells me.
NOTE CONF
No, I don't know.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
But more interestingly is if there are variables.
Um, so this is a little, uh, a little program,
NOTE CONF
uh, called Valens.
It's a list of valuations over, uh, a list of
NOTE CONF
names.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
You give it, you give it a list of names
and it gives you a list of valuations.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And those are all the possible valuations for that list
NOTE CONF
of names.
So if I'd given it the list a B it
NOTE CONF
would give me a list of four functions corresponding to
these four rows.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
First function might say, um, a, uh, the value of
NOTE CONF
a is f, the value of b is f.
Second one might say value of a is f and
NOTE CONF
the value of b is is is, is is t
okay and so forth.
NOTE CONF
All right.
And so this this computes that uh for any list
NOTE CONF
of variable names okay.
This code is a little bit tricky to understand okay.
NOTE CONF
There's been some questions on Piazza people reading ahead about
this function definition okay.
NOTE CONF
So let me just briefly explain this.
I don't have a lot of time.
NOTE CONF
Um, uh, the idea of this.
Let's look at this one down here first.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
First case is if we've got no variables, then as
NOTE CONF
as we've just discussed, there's only one valuation.
It's the empty valuation.
NOTE CONF
This is the one where none of the variables are
defined.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But in the case we have at least one variable
NOTE CONF
x.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, then we compute okay.
We've got at least one variable and then some more
NOTE CONF
variable x is possibly zero of them okay.
We compute the all the possible valuations for x is
NOTE CONF
this is the recursive call.
And then for each one of those valuations we consider
NOTE CONF
the extension of it by adding that the value of
x is true.
NOTE CONF
And the case where adding the value um the value
of x is false.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we're looking at uh, this is using this other
NOTE CONF
function which I'll come to in a second.
We, we take the extension of that valuation by the
NOTE CONF
association of the name X to values?
Uh, true and false.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Two choices.
NOTE CONF
So for each, for each valuation of X and for
each choice of B.
NOTE CONF
We get a valuation produced by this function call here
okay.
NOTE CONF
And informally this is extending the valuation uh even by
the association where x gets the value b.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And um that's what this function does okay.
NOTE CONF
You give it a valuation, you give it a name,
you give it a value for that name.
NOTE CONF
And it computes a valuation, which is the extension of
that evaluation by that association.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um.
NOTE CONF
And there were some questions about this code.
Let me write an alternative way of I mean, this
NOTE CONF
is, this is this is defining what that does.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, you might understand it better if I would write
it differently.
NOTE CONF
Uh.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Given a valuation, a variable and a, um, and a
value for that variable I need.
NOTE CONF
So this is a this is a name.
This is a.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
No, this is not a name.
NOTE CONF
This is a valuation.
This is a name.
NOTE CONF
And this is a bull.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And given those three things I need to compute.
Evaluation.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
The thing on this side is a is evaluation.
NOTE CONF
What's evaluation?
It's a function from name to bool.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So I'll write this as a lambda expression.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
This is a evaluation.
NOTE CONF
So given a name why.
Then I check to see is uh is x equal
NOTE CONF
to y or not.
If so the answer is b.
NOTE CONF
Otherwise the answer is um is uh, whatever it was
for the evaluation that I, that I started with here,
NOTE CONF
um, applied to Y.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's a.
That's a boolean.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this has the type name arrow bool which is
NOTE CONF
what valuation is.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
That's kind of fast, but I hope it's at least
gives you enough of a feeling for this to be
NOTE CONF
able to look at it and understand it.
Um, if you haven't understand it already, to understand it,
NOTE CONF
looking at home, um, it's the same.
It's actually the same definition.
NOTE CONF
Is that all I've done is to is to take,
um, this part of it and make it into a
NOTE CONF
lambda expression.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And what I get out of this is, you know,
for example, um, for the value for the, um, for
NOTE CONF
the variable names A and B, I get a list
of four, um, functions out of it.
NOTE CONF
You can't print out functions in in Haskell.
So this is kind of informal, uh, notation for what
NOTE CONF
you get.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
You get a function which takes a to false and
b to false.
NOTE CONF
Another function which takes a to false and b to
true and so forth.
NOTE CONF
All four of these cases okay.
Each of these functions of course they start off with
NOTE CONF
the empty valuation.
And so each one of these, each one of these
NOTE CONF
functions also takes any other variable name to uh, to
an error message.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I'll just point out here that this base case is
NOTE CONF
important.
Uh, if we would I mean, the the thing that
NOTE CONF
you might be tempted to write here.
Is, um, is evaluations over the empty list of names
NOTE CONF
is the empty list of valuations.
Okay, that would be wrong.
NOTE CONF
First of all, because two to the zero is one,
we know we must have one valuation.
NOTE CONF
And the other reason is that if that was the
empty list, then, um, the result of this for every
NOTE CONF
list of, of variable names would be the empty list,
because you're always doing a, um, you're generating values from
NOTE CONF
the recursive call of this function applied to the smaller
list of variables.
NOTE CONF
And it would always be empty, okay.
Would always be empty, would you never you'd never get
NOTE CONF
anywhere.
So you need you need this to be here like
NOTE CONF
that.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Stunned silence.
All right.
NOTE CONF
Yep.
How does the partial application of extend work?
NOTE CONF
Um.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Are you referring to the piazza?
NOTE CONF
Because it takes in.
Ah.
NOTE CONF
You mean here?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Right?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Extend.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Extend.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
I would like to get all my colours away, but
it's, uh.
NOTE CONF
Uh.
Anyway.
NOTE CONF
Extend.
Oops.
NOTE CONF
It's just.
What's going on here?
NOTE CONF
Yeah, that's that's where I was.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Extend.
NOTE CONF
Um, it takes, uh, three, three, three values and gives
you a value.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, so evaluation a name and a boolean, and it
NOTE CONF
gives you and it gives you a valuation.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So you were you were talking about partial application.
You mean, um, that I mean, looking at the definition,
NOTE CONF
it looks like I'm giving it four values and getting
a boolean.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But that's because the part that's highlighted is, is actually
NOTE CONF
corresponding to this to this type.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is a function from this is the part
that's tricky about this definition.
NOTE CONF
This is the function.
This is a function from um a name to a
NOTE CONF
boolean.
And the way that I've written it, and Haskell allows
NOTE CONF
me to do this is to um, is to take
it's, it's exactly like this definition here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Where I've taken the Y and put it on the
NOTE CONF
left hand side of the equal sign in order to
avoid writing the lambda out explicitly.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So I hope that answers the question.
NOTE CONF
Um, you can talk about partial application if you're talking
about like, this definition.
NOTE CONF
Uh, but the thing that you're defining here is evaluation.
Any other questions?
NOTE CONF
Right.
Your tutorial next week is actually going to be working
NOTE CONF
with this stuff and, um, extending it a bit.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, given given these definitions.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And going back to this, I was saying we're going
to work out whether or not, um, a proposition is
NOTE CONF
satisfiable by computing the list of um, of values for
each of the valuations of the variables and checking to
NOTE CONF
see if there's at least one T in here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And that's what this code does.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This is one line.
One line definition of what it means for a proposition
NOTE CONF
to be satisfiable based on the definitions that I've just
given you.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we compute all of the value we, you know,
NOTE CONF
given a proposition P, we compute the valuations, all the
possible valuations over all the names of variables that are
NOTE CONF
in P.
And then for each one of those we evaluate p.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And this gives us a list of all of the
NOTE CONF
values of p for all of the valuations.
So that's exactly this list here that's written in the
NOTE CONF
last column here okay.
And P is satisfiable if at least one of those
NOTE CONF
is true.
And so we take the disjunction.
NOTE CONF
And that's the answer right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
When is the proposition satisfiable.
It's when there's at least one valuation that makes it
NOTE CONF
true okay.
And the code that we've written up until now is
NOTE CONF
enough to give us, uh, that we can write this
definition like that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And this is, this is kind of interesting.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Because, uh, we've I mean, I've written the definition of
NOTE CONF
the of propositions that was six lines, the names of
the functions.
NOTE CONF
I'm sorry, the the evaluation of propositions.
That was another six lines.
NOTE CONF
The, the list of names of, uh, uh, the list
of variable names in a, in a proposition that was
NOTE CONF
in the sixth line.
So that's 18 lines so far.
NOTE CONF
The, um, the, uh, code for producing all the possible
evaluations over a list of variables.
NOTE CONF
That was another four.
So lines.
NOTE CONF
22 lines.
Um, I might have left out some.
NOTE CONF
And then in this line here is another one line.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So anyway, it's about 30 lines of code, let's say
ish.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that's about a page of code.
NOTE CONF
Page of code to define the syntax of propositions, evaluating
propositions and working out whether a proposition is satisfiable or
NOTE CONF
not.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's a quite compact, uh, uh, program for doing
this, this, um, implementing logic and uh, computing whether or
NOTE CONF
not a proposition is satisfiable or not.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's, uh, that's kind of nice that you can
do that in Haskell.
NOTE CONF
Um, here's just an here's just my example.
P1 basically, um, uh, doing what's in this truth table,
NOTE CONF
this kind of thing, which is now a mess.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So here's the valuations.
Uh, so here's the, the names of, of this proposition.
NOTE CONF
Here's the valuations over the list of names.
Here is the, uh, list of values for each one
NOTE CONF
of those Evaluations, you know.
True.
NOTE CONF
False.
True.
NOTE CONF
And here is the disjunction.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Any questions about that?
I have something I want to talk about in the
NOTE CONF
last ten minutes, which is which is different.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
No questions okay.
I'm going to talk about uh, uh, two.
NOTE CONF
Um, this is, this is not to do with expression
trees.
NOTE CONF
Um, but it's two, um, uh, algebraic data types that
you might find useful.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, and, um, the first one is a data type
NOTE CONF
that's useful for a situation where you have optional data.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And it's called the maybe type.
So you can use this for, um, for example, a
NOTE CONF
function that takes an optional argument, or a function which
delivers an optional result.
NOTE CONF
And I'll just show you this.
First of all, I'll show you the type, and then
NOTE CONF
I'll show you one example of each of those things.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this type the type of optional values.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So if you if you've got an optional value of
type A, um the type we use for that and
NOTE CONF
this is built in in Haskell is maybe a okay.
So it's, it's maybe there and it's maybe not there.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It's optional.
NOTE CONF
So if it's not there then the value is nothing.
That's a constructor.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So it's a value.
NOTE CONF
It's a it's a non-existent value of type A.
Let's let's say okay.
NOTE CONF
It's a type.
It's a value of type maybe a um so it's
NOTE CONF
a, it's a value that's not there.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Suppose that you do have a value of type A.
Uh, then you wrap it up in a constructor, you
NOTE CONF
always need a constructor and you use constructor just so.
It's just a so so uh uh, an optional integer
NOTE CONF
would be maybe int, and the values would be nothing
or uh, or all of the possible, you know, just
NOTE CONF
three.
Just seven okay.
NOTE CONF
So a value that's present for this optional type is
just of a of a value.
NOTE CONF
And a value that's absent is nothing.
There is no value.
NOTE CONF
You got that.
And so for example here's a here's an example of
NOTE CONF
an optional argument okay.
So let's suppose that we want to exponentiate um we
NOTE CONF
take you know m to the N and we're lazy.
And so if M is two where we can't be
NOTE CONF
bothered to say that m is two, we just say,
well the default value of m is two.
NOTE CONF
So if I don't give you a value, then assume
it's two.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
That's what I mean by default value.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this function power instead of being int arrow int
NOTE CONF
arrow int the first argument is a maybe in.
So it's an optional value of type int.
NOTE CONF
And there's two cases.
If I don't supply a value then the value is
NOTE CONF
nothing.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Then I take two to the end.
That's the second.
NOTE CONF
The second argument is n okay I take two to
the n two is the default.
NOTE CONF
But if I supply a value like I do here
okay.
NOTE CONF
If it's just m whatever m is, then I take
um m to the n okay.
NOTE CONF
So default value of two.
If I supply a value I use that value okay.
NOTE CONF
It's the one that I've supplied here.
All right.
NOTE CONF
And then optional Actual results.
Uh, if I, if I, um, you know, you know
NOTE CONF
that if you divide by zero, you get an error,
right?
NOTE CONF
So that's kind of inconvenient.
Um, if I, if I try to do division like
NOTE CONF
this and m is zero, then it will give me
an error.
NOTE CONF
So this is a a version of division integer division
which doesn't give an error.
NOTE CONF
What it gives is a is an optional result.
So in case in case the numbers are are not
NOTE CONF
in case that the um denominator or the divisor is
is zero, it won't give you an error.
NOTE CONF
It will give you, um, an optional result, which is
uh, no, no value.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So dividing n by zero with this function I define
NOTE CONF
it to give me the value.
Nothing.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
This would be the case that would normally give you
NOTE CONF
an error.
And um, if, if, if you've got a non-zero second
NOTE CONF
argument here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Then you, uh, you do the normal division and you
have to wrap it up in a constructor like this
NOTE CONF
to get a value that matches the, uh, the type
that you've defined here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So these are the two values that you can get
NOTE CONF
out of this either no value if you try to
divide by zero or a value wrapped up of the
NOTE CONF
of the division.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Now using an optional result requires a little bit of,
NOTE CONF
uh, a little bit of, uh, unwrapping.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So here's the function that I just defined for dividing,
um, which, um, which produces a maybe int as a
NOTE CONF
result.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So look at that type.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So it's producing not an integer result but a but
a maybe int as a result.
NOTE CONF
And now suppose I want to write a function which
uses that to do something.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, so this requires a little bit of, uh, unwrapping.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Suppose that I want to write a function which for
NOTE CONF
every reason it takes the result of dividing n by
m and adds three to it.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And suppose I just decide that for the case where
NOTE CONF
m is zero, I should produce the result three.
Because there's nothing else.
NOTE CONF
I mean, I don't have anything.
Uh, yeah.
NOTE CONF
Any better idea?
Okay, so this is a wrong way to do this.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
This will give you a typeerror because divide divide n
NOTE CONF
m.
This has type maybe int and maybe int plus int
NOTE CONF
is a type error.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's the wrong way to do it.
The right way to do it is down here Okay.
NOTE CONF
Divide n of m has type maybe int.
And so there are two cases.
NOTE CONF
It's either nothing and then the result is three or
it's um a result wrapped up with this constructor.
NOTE CONF
Just and then the result is R plus three.
So I've unwrapped the value and added three to it.
NOTE CONF
Um this syntax by the way I think this is
the first time that you've seen this.
NOTE CONF
It's just a yeah case.
Case analysis.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's optional values and results may be type.
And I have just enough time to show you, uh,
NOTE CONF
disjoint union of two types.
So remember that the, uh, that a list always has
NOTE CONF
types of the same value in it.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
The values of the same type.
NOTE CONF
You get a list of integers, a list of booleans,
a list of functions from into booleans, whatever.
NOTE CONF
It's always the same type.
So here is a way to get a list of
NOTE CONF
values of different types.
Okay, but I'm not lying by saying that the list
NOTE CONF
always has to have the values of the same type,
it's that the type has to be the type of
NOTE CONF
values which are either one type or the other type.
Okay, so this is a type of values which is
NOTE CONF
either a or b okay.
It's called either a b again built into Haskell.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So you've either got it's a this is kind of
NOTE CONF
union or in fact disjoint union.
Uh, so um here's a just looking down at this
NOTE CONF
example.
I think I'm going to run out of time here
NOTE CONF
probably.
Um, here is a list of values where some of
NOTE CONF
them are numbers and some of them are strings.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
But They're not.
They're not numbers or strings on their own.
NOTE CONF
They're numbers or strings wrapped up with constructors which say,
if I'm talking about kind of the left component of
NOTE CONF
this union or the right component of this union.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So either in string, so all of the integers are
going to be tagged to say that there are, you
NOTE CONF
know, the left component of this.
So left a left one left to left 17.
NOTE CONF
And all of the strings are tagged as being from
the right, uh union components.
NOTE CONF
So.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Hello.
And right.
NOTE CONF
Empty empty string or no, uh, space and right world.
And so um, okay, so you can build strings like,
NOTE CONF
you can build, um, list like this and you can
write functions which, for example, add together all the integers
NOTE CONF
in, in such a list or um, take.
Yeah, that's, that's that function.
NOTE CONF
And here's a function that concatenates all the strings in
such a list.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And I'm out of time.
NOTE CONF
I will just say for those who are interested, there's
some code at the end of this lecture that you
NOTE CONF
can look at and play with if you want.
And it's a, it's, it's, it's an interpreter for Haskell
NOTE CONF
written in, uh, this much code.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is a representation of Haskell syntax, very simple
subset of Haskell.
NOTE CONF
Uh, and um, a definition of evaluation of such programs.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's how much space it writes takes to implement
Haskell.
NOTE CONF
If you, uh, if you do it in Haskell.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
Sorry, that was a bit fast.
Hi.
NOTE CONF
Um, I was reading for, uh, the, uh, with the
trees for next week.
NOTE CONF
The.